README.md, before:

# NEF_emulator

## ⚙ Setup locally

**Host prerequisites**: `docker`, `docker-compose`, `build-essential`\*, `jq`\*\*

After cloning the repository, there are 4 more steps to do. For convinience, we have created a [`Makefile`](Makefile) that contains a command for each step + several common `docker-compose` tasks which you may find handy in the future.

1. create your local `.env` file
2. build the container images
3. run the containers
4. add some test data (optional)

```bash
cd NEF_emulator

# 1.
make prepare-dev-env

# 2.
make build

# 3.
make up

# 4.
make db-init-simple
```

>\* 💡 Info: *To use the `make` command you need to `apt install build-essential` first. In case you don't want to proceed with this installation, you can head over to the `Makefile` and copy/paste the shell commands that are being used for every step.*

> \*\* 💡 Info: *The shell script used at step 4 (for adding test data) uses `jq` which is a lightweight and flexible command-line JSON processor. You can install it with `apt install jq`*

### Try out your setup

After the containers are up and running:

 - access and start playing with the Swager UI at: [localhost:8888/docs](http://localhost:8888/docs)
 - login to the admin dashboard at: [localhost:8888/login](http://localhost:8888/login)
     - Default credentials: `admin@my-email.com` / `pass`
     - they can be found/changed inside your `.env` file



<br><br>



## 🏷️ How to work on a specific tag / release

After `git clone` or `git pull` you can specify the release you want to work on by just using its `tag` in the following command:

    git switch --detach tag_here

You will get into a *detached HEAD* state in Git, but this is perfectly fine, you can go back anytime by just using `git switch main`.  
Short reasoning on why we choose tags over branches:

>**A tag is immutable.**  
>[source](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/9810050/why-should-i-use-tags-vs-release-beta-branches-for-versioning/)



<br><br>



## NetApp communication options

Below, you may find different options for establishing a bi-directional communication between the NetApp and the NEF_emulator (for example to be used for `callbacks`.

### 1. via `host.docker.internal`

If you develop your NetApp directly on the host, for example a `Flask` app running on port `9999`:
 - you will be able to connect to the NEF_emulator at: `http://localhost:8888`
 - the NEF_emulator will **not** be able to connect to `http://localhost:9999` because "localhost" for a container is itself, not the host.
 - to overcome the above problem, Docker provides `host.docker.internal`
 - the NEF_emulator will be able to connect to `http://host.docker.internal:9999`
 - ⚠ make sure you bind your NetApp on `0.0.0.0:[port]` and not only on `127.0.0.1:[port]`

```
┌───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                          HOST                                 │
│                                                               │
│                        ┌───────────────────────────────┐      │
│      NetApp            │    docker-compose network     │      │
│         │              ├───────────────────────────────┤      │
│         │              │    NEF_emulator containers    │      │
│         │              │           live here           │      │
│         │              └── :80 ────────────── :5050 ───┘      │
│         │                   │                   │             │
│         │                   │                   │             │
└────── :9999 ───────────── :8888 ───────────── :5050 ──────────┘
          │                   │ 
          └─< communication >─┘
```

Commit message:

add details about using the same docker bridge

README.md, after:

# NEF_emulator

## ⚙ Setup locally

**Host prerequisites**: `docker`, `docker-compose`, `build-essential`\*, `jq`\*\*

After cloning the repository, there are 4 more steps to do. For convinience, we have created a [`Makefile`](Makefile) that contains a command for each step + several common `docker-compose` tasks which you may find handy in the future.

1. create your local `.env` file
2. build the container images
3. run the containers
4. add some test data (optional)

```bash
cd NEF_emulator

# 1.
make prepare-dev-env

# 2.
make build

# 3.
make up

# 4.
make db-init-simple
```

>\* 💡 Info: *To use the `make` command you need to `apt install build-essential` first. In case you don't want to proceed with this installation, you can head over to the `Makefile` and copy/paste the shell commands that are being used for every step.*

> \*\* 💡 Info: *The shell script used at step 4 (for adding test data) uses `jq` which is a lightweight and flexible command-line JSON processor. You can install it with `apt install jq`*

### Try out your setup

After the containers are up and running:

 - access and start playing with the Swager UI at: [localhost:8888/docs](http://localhost:8888/docs)
 - login to the admin dashboard at: [localhost:8888/login](http://localhost:8888/login)
     - Default credentials: `admin@my-email.com` / `pass`
     - they can be found/changed inside your `.env` file



<br><br>



## 🏷️ How to work on a specific tag / release

After `git clone` or `git pull` you can specify the release you want to work on by just using its `tag` in the following command:

    git switch --detach tag_here

You will get into a *detached HEAD* state in Git, but this is perfectly fine, you can go back anytime by just using `git switch main`.  
Short reasoning on why we choose tags over branches:

>**A tag is immutable.**  
>[source](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/9810050/why-should-i-use-tags-vs-release-beta-branches-for-versioning/)



<br><br>



## NetApp communication options

Below, you may find different options for establishing a bi-directional communication over HTTP between the NetApp and the NEF_emulator (for example to be used for `callbacks`.

### 1. via `host.docker.internal`

If you develop your NetApp directly on the host, for example a `Flask` app running on port `9999`:
 - you will be able to connect to the NEF_emulator at: `http://localhost:8888`
 - the NEF_emulator will **not** be able to connect to `http://localhost:9999` because "localhost" for a container is itself, not the host.
 - to overcome the above problem, Docker provides `host.docker.internal`
 - the NEF_emulator will be able to connect to `http://host.docker.internal:9999`
 - ⚠ make sure you bind your NetApp on `0.0.0.0:[port]` and not only on `127.0.0.1:[port]`

```
┌───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                          HOST                                 │
│                                                               │
│                        ┌───────────────────────────────┐      │
│      NetApp            │    docker-compose network     │      │
│         │              ├───────────────────────────────┤      │
│         │              │    NEF_emulator containers    │      │
│         │              │           live here           │      │
│         │              └── :80 ────────────── :5050 ───┘      │
│         │                   │                   │             │
│         │                   │                   │             │
└────── :9999 ───────────── :8888 ───────────── :5050 ──────────┘
          │                   │ 
          └─< communication >─┘
```

<br>

### 2. via the same docker bridge network

If you develop your NetApp as a container, the easiest way to establish a bi-directional communication would be to `attach` it to the pre-existing bridge network that the NEF_emulator containers use:
 - this bridge network is automatically created whenever you `docker-compose up` a project, in our case that would probably be named as `nef_emulator_default`
 - Docker will provide automatic DNS resolution between these containers names
 - your NetApp will be able to connect to the NEF_emulator at `http://backend`
 - the NEF_emulator will be able to connect to your NetApp at `http://your_netapp_container_name:9999`
 - ⚠ make sure you use the container ports directly, not the `published` ones

```
┌───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                          HOST                                 │
│                                                               │
│    ┌───────────────────────────────────────────────────┐      │
│    │               docker-compose network              │      │
│    ├───────────────────────────────────────────────────┤      │
│    │                                                   │      │
│    │  NetApp                NEF_emulator containers    │      │
│    │ also lives here               live here           │      │
│    │                                                   │      │
│    └─── :9999 ──────────── :80 ────────────── :5050 ───┘      │
│         │                   │                   │             │
│         ├─< communication >─┤                   │             │
│         │                   │                   │             │
│         │                   │                   │             │
└────── :9999 ───────────── :8888 ───────────── :5050 ──────────┘
```
